Type 1
Every type of power system explained,
including number six, a category I've
never seen anyone discuss before. Number
one, wild is the first type of power
system. Wild systems operate under what
is called soft magic. Meaning the rules
about what can and cannot happen are
barely defined, if they're defined at
all. In a world with soft magic, a
wizard can cast a spell to create a
fireball or turn you into a frog or do
any other thing the author can think of,
with no limits or rules to follow.
characters powers might appear at
random, change between installments, or
just serve the purpose of specific
scenarios. In the Mario video games,
there's no rational explanation for
superstars or fireflowers. They exist,
so we get to have more fun playing as
Mario. They don't say anything about the
grander world or Mario himself. In a
wild power system, there is no
overarching logic binding together the
fantasy of the world. And when I say
fantasy or magic, I don't mean that
literally. Science fiction worlds where
the powers are based on technology can
absolutely have a wild system, too. Rick
and Morty is a good example. Rick's
science can do basically anything he
wants it to, regardless of whether or
not it's based in any real world
technological process. Now, hearing
this, you might think that wild systems
are just bad or lazy, but that's not
necessarily the case at all. A lot of
stories with wild power systems are
great as long as they account for it
correctly. If the power system exists
primarily to serve the tone of the
world, the spectacle of the battles, or
the identity of the characters, then is
absolutely acting as a positive force
for the story. The emphasis doesn't need
to be placed on the mechanics of the
powers for the system or the greater
story to be good. Let me give you some
examples. In Adventure Time, the land of
Oo absolutely has a wild power system.
There are all types of bonkers, magic,
gods, demons, technology, monsters, and
none of it has any explanation. There
are vague structures. We learn that
there are four elements in the world.
Ice, fire, candy, and slime. But why
these are the elements or how they
interact with each other is never the
point of the stories being told. Or what
about Sonic the Hedgehog? These games
take place in a world where the main
characters all have unique superpowers
with no explanation why. Sonic is super
fast. Knuckles is super strong. Tails
can fly. But why they're like that
doesn't matter. We just want to play as
them and do cool stuff. The Chaos
Emeralds are pure soft magic. We don't
know what they are or why they work the
way they do. They can basically grant
wishes just because. But that's because
the power system isn't the focus of the
world. In a wild system, power is
allowed to be strange, flexible, or
unexplained because the story is about
something else. The mechanics are not
meant to be interrogated because they're
not the focus. The only real
stipulations required for a wild power
system to be good are these. Is it cool?
And is it consistent? The first is
self-explanatory, so I'll focus on the
second one. The abilities in a wild
system need to be fairly consistent. We
don't need to know why Sonic is fast or
exactly how fast he is, as long as he's
generally the fastest guy around in
every story. Mario's mushrooms don't
need a backstory, but they do need to
make him bigger and stronger every time
he eats one. Without consistency in your
power system, your story basically
devolves into the babblings of a
kindergartener. Batman grew a million
feet tall and blew up the sun. Then he
turned his hands into ice cream and did
a backflip over Jupiter. It's just
nonsense. The second type of power
Type 2
system is definitive. Basically the
opposite of wild. These systems use hard
magic. There is a structured set of
rules that explains the basic premise
behind the fantasy elements of this
world. Just like a wild system, this is
a really broad net. Any power system
that has any amount of explanation is
technically definitive and they spread
across a broad spectrum from simple to
complex. Here, power is governed by
identifiable rules that are consistent,
shared, and understood within the
[music] world. The audience is
encouraged to ask questions and make
predictions based on their knowledge of
how the power [music] system works.
Where does this come from? What are the
limits? What if this rule is broken?
Those are the thoughts that the author
is trying to spark in the viewer's mind
to get them engaged with the story
because that is the primary benefit of a
definitive system. It engages your
brain. When we understand the basics of
chakra control, it becomes interesting
to watch Naruto train his reenon and
create the rasen shuriken. If we didn't
know that Chakra had natures like wind
and fire, or that the rasen is an
exceedingly difficult judu because of
the concentrated energy and spinning
force, watching an arc where he learns
the rasen shuriken becomes immediately
boring. It's just a guy trying and
failing over and over again to do a cool
thing. The context is what gets us to
care. My Hero Academia is the same. The
power system of quirks is definitive.
Both the characters and the audience
understand basic rules of the world.
Most people are born with [music]
quirks. They are a fundamental part of
your identity. Training a quirk can make
it stronger. And hypothetically, having
multiple quirks makes you really, really
powerful. So, when we're introduced to
All for One, a villain who can take away
people's quirks and use them for
himself, it immediately clicks in our
minds how powerful, dangerous, and scary
he is. No one needs to gas him up for
him to be a threatening villain. Our
knowledge of the power system informs
our opinions on the character and leads
us to speculate. How many quirks do you
think he has? Are there any he can't
steal? Could he ever take too many? To
use an example from a western story,
Harry Potter is absolutely a definitive
power system. While the rules can be a
little loose in places, they're
generally fairly rigid. Magic is nearly
impossible to do without a wand. You
need to understand the spell that you're
casting and pronounce it correctly. The
speed at which you can cast a spell and
react to others directly influences your
skill in duels. And all of this is
boosted even further if you're creative
and can think on your feet. Harry's
entire dueling philosophy, which lets
him save the world, is based on the
first rule. You need a wand to cast
spells. So, he just gets really, really
good at the one spell that makes other
people drop their wands. This is a
clever cheese strategy based on the
rules of the world, and it enders us to
his character. The defining philosophy
of a definitive power system is this.
Power is meaningful because it is
constrained. Abilities come with costs,
limits, and drawbacks. One of the most
basic definitive systems is key from
Dragon Ball. A natural energy you
cultivate through training with various
applications like flight, extra sensory
perception, enhanced strength, energy
blasts. But the fundamentals are simple.
Everyone has a finite amount of key. You
use it up the more you fight and you can
get more by increasing your life force,
usually [music] through training. But
once we understand these simple rules,
it opens up the possibilities into some
really exciting stuff. Transformations,
the idea that by undergoing a physical
change, you can rapidly increase your
life energy, meaning more key, meaning
you get much stronger. Or fusions,
joining the key of two beings makes a
new being with drastically more power.
And of course, there are drawbacks, too.
The Kaio-Ken was an early way for Goku
to boost his key for a short while. But
it had a drawback. He was left weak and
in debilitating pain right afterwards.
So, when he decided to ignore King Kai's
advice and push the ability far beyond
its safe limits, it was insanely
dramatic. We knew the cost would be
potentially deadly. As simple as key is,
understanding it is fundamental to
getting why Cell is a bigger threat than
Frieza. Why characters make drastic
life-threatening choices and why Gohan's
hair changing ever so slightly is
actually a really big deal. Everyone
looks back on these transformations with
nostalgia because they were so hype and
exciting, but they wouldn't have been if
we didn't have the context for why they
mattered. Moving on, each of the
following types of power systems are all
definitive with an additional qualifier,
meaning they follow rules that we can
understand and they also have other
unique attributes. You'll see what I
mean in a minute. Our third type of
power system is thematic. In a thematic
Type 3
system, the power not only follows
rules, but its execution by the
characters directly ties into the
grander ideas or messages of the
narrative. Here, power reflects who you
are, what you believe, or what the story
is trying to say. A good litmus test to
see if a power system is thematic is to
try explaining it to someone without
mentioning any theme or moral of the
story. I think the best example I can
give to introduce the concept is Star
Wars. In this universe, there is the
force, an energy field that exists in
all places and within all beings and
objects, connecting everything together
in a giant supernatural invisible web.
Characters can use the force to
strengthen themselves and manipulate
matter around themselves. And if I
stopped right there, this might be a
regular old definitive system, but there
is a lot of additional context needed.
In Star Wars, you can interact with the
force primarily in two ways. by
submitting to its will, moving along
with it, and using its power for the
greater balance of the galaxy, the light
side used by the Jedi. Or you can bend
it to your will, indulging your negative
emotions to draw strength and
destructive power, the dark side of the
Sith. The way the characters engage with
the power system is fundamentally linked
to their thoughts, emotions, wills, and
morality. Luke Skywalker learning to let
go and trust in something greater than
himself, have patience, and dedicate
himself to improvement. and finally
choose love and forgiveness over hatred
and revenge. These aren't just the
morals of his movies. Each lesson makes
him a better and more powerful Jedi. And
in contrast, if we look at the sequel
trilogy, the thematic elements of the
power system are forgotten or completely
misinterpreted. Ray's lesson across all
three films is that she's awesome and
doesn't need to change anything about
herself. A fundamental betrayal of the
themes that were integral to the power
system in the original trilogy. So when
she gets a giant power up at the end and
says, "I am all the Jedi," the audience
feels nothing. Why is she all the Jedi?
How did we get to this point? The Force
has devolved into a wild power system
now, just doing whatever services the
plot, no longer tied to the rules that
the audience can understand or themes
that define the characters. Another
great example is from Avatar: The Last
Airbender. In the original series,
bending was a deeply spiritual practice
based on Eastern martial arts. We saw
that people learned bending by studying
nature, earth bending from the badger
moles, water bending from the moon and
the tides. And the more wise and
enlightened a character was, the more
powerful a bender they were in tandem.
Yes, there were villains who betrayed
the natural order of the world and were
exceedingly powerful, but they could
never reach the heights of a grandmaster
in tune with nature and the spirits.
It's why we understood even a blind
11-year-old girl Tooff could defeat
gigantic musclemen with decades of
earthbending experience because she
understood the badger moles on a far
better level than anyone else on the
planet. We totally accept that four old
guys can take back bossing say on their
own because the white lotus is filled
with the wisest characters from the
entire story. It was clear that the
power of characters was defined by both
the rules of the world and the themes of
the story. The best example, however, is
probably Gurin Lagon. Spiral power is
human willpower. The primary message of
the series that the human will can break
any barrier and push past any limit is
the exact metaphysical power that Simone
and the team Diguran used to overthrow
their multiversal overlords and save all
of causality. And it's sick as hell
because it riles up that emotion, that
theme within our hearts. I can do
anything if I keep trying. And that's
the primary benefit of a thematic power
system. By using symbolism to directly
tie philosophy to the magic of the
world, we're more likely as viewers to
understand and appreciate the message,
as well as feel more connected to the
characters as they learn the same
lesson. I love watching Goku get
stronger over the course of Dragon Ball.
But I relate so much more to Ang as he
grew up and mastered [clears throat] the
four elements because I joined him on
that journey of maturing and learning a
deeper appreciation of the world and its
beauty. The fourth type of power system
Type 4
is pluralistic. This is a definitive
system in which multiple other systems
exist. Essentially, it's a world where
there are several unique and separate
power systems [music] that exist on
their own but can interact with one
another. The important distinction here
is that each power system [music] has
its own rules, history, origins, and
limitations, but they share a single
continuity. A great example is Jojo's
Bizarre Adventure. When you first sit
down to watch Jojo, even in part one,
we're introduced to multiple power
systems. The stone masks and vampires
have their own rules and limitations,
and the breathing art of Homone is a
separate power system devised by ancient
man to combat these vampiric forces.
Even though they're immediately at odds,
the two power systems can exist without
interacting. Jonathan beats a vampiric
Dio the first time by dropping a burning
house on him. He didn't even know what
Homone was yet. And as the series
continues, we get even more power
systems within the same world. Stands
are introduced in part three. Psychic
ghosts that each behave [music]
according to their own unique rules.
Stands really skirt the line closer to a
wild system with just how much they can
vary. But they do have guidelines that
the characters and we viewers can
comprehend and follow along with. And
when Jodoro battles Dio, he's forced to
contend with both the most powerful
stand of the world and Dio's vampiric
abilities, meaning attacks that would
defeat other villains have no effect due
to his near limitless healing factor.
Watching these [music] different power
systems play off one another in the same
world is exciting and cool. It's
practically half the fun of Western
superhero comics. In Marvel or DC, you
have gigantic worlds that basically have
to adhere to a pluralistic power system
because they contain so many
supernatural characters. For example,
Superman. His biology as an alien, a
Kryptonian, is a power system. We
understand the rules that by absorbing
the light of a yellow sun, he gains
[music] incredible powers. The more
sunlight he gets, the stronger and
faster he gets. If you swap it out with
red sun radiation, he loses his powers.
And if he comes into contact with
kryptonite, he loses those powers and
experiences incredible pain. With this
power system, we can generally predict
how he'll react to any given situation.
And when Supergirl shows up, his cousin,
we immediately understand how her powers
work as well because she uses the same
power system. But Superman isn't the
only hero in DC. You also have the
Flash, who taps into an extradimensional
energy known as the speed force, the
source of all movement through the
entire multiverse. By harnessing it, he
can move faster than light, travel
through time, and even sap the speed and
momentum of other characters. The speed
force is its own power system, too. One
that other speedsters use. So, if
[music] Superman and the Flash are at
odds for some reason, we instantly start
asking ourselves, how do these two power
systems interact? Superman can move
faster than [music] Light 2 by absorbing
yellow sunlight. So, if Flash tried to
steal his speed to freeze him in place,
is there an amount of sunlight Superman
could absorb to overwhelm the speed
steel ability? In a snap, I am so
incredibly engaged in the story because
I'm asking questions about the way the
world functions in a [music] pluralistic
power system. Thor's hammer is magically
enchanted to only be lifted by those
worthy of it. But, Magneto can control
and manipulate metal. Could his powers
lift the hammer? Can Homone be used to
damage [music] stands? Can Wonder
Woman's lasso of truth overpower the
will of a Green Lantern? And speaking of
Green Lanterns, an important thing to
note is that the multiple power systems
within a pluralistic system can be any
type. Green lantern rings function a
specific way, powered by a specific
creature that harnesses willpower. And
that system can interact with other
systems like the red or blue lantern,
each of which have slightly different
abilities and rules. You can group all
of the lanterns into one pluralistic
power system which is itself one of many
in the grander DC pluralistic power
system alongside the speed force,
Kryptonians, Martians, Atlanteanss, etc.
And the lantern [music] cores are also
thematic systems as the user of a ring
has their power as a lantern directly
tied to a given emotion along with their
ability to understand and regulate. Can
you tell? I think green lanterns are
really cool. Just this one little piece
of the grander DC universe is so
complex. Which is why there are so many
ideas and questions we can have when
considering them as part of that greater
whole. In a pluralistic system,
different sources of power answer to
different laws, solve different
problems, and produce different kinds of
conflict. Because each system is
internally coherent, it allows us to ask
greater questions. Magic versus
technology, faith versus science,
willpower versus biology, fate versus
free will, or a free-for-all. of far
more than just forces or ideology. And
of course, then you have a world like
Bleach where the multiple power systems
overlap as the protagonist learns to use
them in tandem with one another,
creating a greater sense of hype. The
fifth and final traditional power system
is synergistic, a definitive power
Type 5
system that has multiple sets of rules
with strict internal consistency and
high levels of complexity. I said before
that any definitive system exists on a
spectrum of complexity. A synergistic
system is when you push the limits all
the way to the right, creating a very
rigidly mechanical construction that
guides the world. Essentially, it treats
the fictional power system as more of a
science than magic. All or most of the
questions a viewer might have about the
functions of the power are explained.
Details that would normally be handwaved
away are given a thorough examination to
create an intellectual rigor that's
pretty unique in fiction, but can be
very refreshing if that's your sort of
thing. and the various sets of rules
introduced all interact with one another
in an expected way. The mystery is not
in how it all works. In a synergistic
system, there is a closed logic loop.
Edge cases are explainable. They're not
handwaved away. To return to a previous
example, Naruto's system of chakra has
some rigid definitions and rules.
Particular chakra natures are strong and
weak against each other. They have
combined nature transformations when you
mix them. Wind and water chakra creates
ice release, for example. But a lot of
this overlap is kind of vaguely stuffed
into the catch-all of keek genkai or
bloodline jutsu. They allow for all
sorts of magic that doesn't fit into the
nature release model. For example, we
don't know what happens if you mix fire
and lightning release or the hand signs
used to summon jutsu. How they work or
which ones are connected to a particular
jutsu is never given any explanation.
For that reason, chakra doesn't qualify
as a synergistic system. Of course, the
best example, and the one I'm sure many
of you have already typed up in a
comment about is Nen from Hunter Hunter.
Nen is often hailed as the pinnacle of
power systems in anime because of how
detailed and internally consistent it is
while maintaining such an air of
simplicity. It all begins with five
basic core principles. Aura quantity,
aura control, n categories, conditions
and limitations, and intent and risk.
All of these five principles are fairly
easy to understand in a vacuum. And when
they are all applied throughout the
story, they make up every subsequent
ability that characters show and the
logic of the system. Essentially, they
turn it into a math equation where we
can fairly reliably predict how a
character's power will change based on
the variables. Applying a restriction
increases an ability strength. Narrowing
the conditions make it more effective.
Adding personal risk makes the power
more reliable. And every hunter's nen
type tells us exactly which abilities
they're predetermined to be better or
worse at using. The show even goes out
of its way to answer questions about
this early. Spending your time training
up a nen type that you're not efficient
in is likely to get you killed. And even
the heavy hitters, who in most manga and
anime would be special exceptions to the
rules of the power system, still exists
comfortably within Nen's constraints.
Kroo is busted, but he has pretty heavy
constraints on his power. Goon can
become the strongest character in the
series, but he must pay the cost of his
condition to achieve it. The same can be
said for Brandon Sanderson's Stormlight
Archive, a series of fantasy novels set
on alien planet Roshar, where the
protagonists use the power of surgebind,
absorbing the power of Stormlight to
fuel their different types of spells, of
which there are 10. Surgebinding is only
possible by fusing with a sprren,
mystical spirits that embody concepts
like honor and truth. And if it sounds
like I'm just spitting gibberish, that's
only the beginning. There are multiple
other smaller magic systems present. The
Stormlight Archives are a pluralistic
world, but everything is mechanically
explained and understood by the
characters. Much like Nen, to use
surgebinding, you need to have proper
understanding of the essentials. Access
to Stormlight, a bond with a sprren, you
need to speak the proper ideals with the
corresponding intent. There are a lot of
very specific rules at play. That is a
synergistic system. In these types of
worlds, new powers are rarely a
surprise. They're simply clever
applications of the specific rules
already outlined. And because of that,
battles are more like puzzles than
clashing power levels. Watching them
unfold is sort of like watching a chess
match. You need to know how each piece
acts in order to follow along. But if
you do, it can be really riveting to
watch two masters match wits. The
important thing to remember is that a
synergistic system isn't just really
complex. It needs multiple sets of
defined rules that interact with one
another and achieve synergy. If a
knowledgeable character makes a new
ability and you in the audience can
reasonably predict how it will function,
that is probably a synergistic system.
Our sixth power system is meta, a
Type 6
diagetic structure of power that exists
both inside and outside the cannon of
the narrative. Meta systems exist to
serve narrative structure, genre
commentary, or mechanics outside the
world's internal logic. These systems
know that they are systems and are
relevant at least one level of
abstraction above the story. Now, this
is a little hard to understand without
an example. So, let's take a look at
Undertale. In the game, actions taken by
the player, saving, loading, resetting,
they canonically affect what happens
within the world. Characters remember
previous timelines and player choices.
Frisk's determination, while absolutely
a thematic power system, is also a meta
one. It's an inuniverse explanation for
events happening outside the universe,
deaths being undone and timelines
repeating. The characters with most
determination control the story's
direction and ultimately override
causality. And this isn't a one-off.
It's a legitimate system of power.
Flowey uses it, too. He knows he's in a
loop and exploits the save mechanic to
his advantage. In Dokyoki Literature
Club, there are clearly two distinct
levels of reality. the base canon
existence where anime girls go to high
school and join a literature club and
have teenage romances with the player
character. And then there's the meta
power system. Monica is aware that she
exists within the confines of a visual
novel. She knows she's in a video game
on a computer and has meta abilities
that can affect the base world, altering
the backstories and personalities of the
other girls to make them less desirable
to the player. erasing everything in the
world so it's just her left over and
even reading the files on your computer
so that she knows your name in real
life. The rules of her abilities
explicitly transcend the reality in
which she exists. Structured around the
mechanics of the medium outside her
world's internal logic in a meta power
system. One of the following is true.
The audience is canonically relevant.
Narrative rules grant power. Or rules of
the genre override and retcon the
established continuity. Now, to be
clear, this doesn't automatically make
every video game a meta power system.
The fact that Link from Zelda can carry
35 swords or pause to eat a 100 apples
to instantly heal from the brink of
death. These are mechanics of the game,
but they're not referenced within the
narrative. If Zelda saw and commented on
the fact that you can heal a stab wound
through the heart by eating some soup,
then this would qualify as a meta power.
Similarly, powers that appear to break
the laws of reality, but have an
explanation in universe are also not
meta. Luffy's Gear 5 seems to break the
world by acknowledging that he's a
cartoon and turning the environment into
rubber hose slapstick props, but all
he's doing is giving the things he
touches the same rubber-like quality
that his body has. He's not actually
using tune force or acting outside the
bounds of reality. The rules aren't
changing because the story, genre, or
Type 7
audience demands it. Finally, the
seventh type of power system doesn't
actually exist. There are only six. I
lied to you and you fell for it. Stay
frosty.